One observation that stands out immediately as counterintuitive is the decline in student scores as spending per student increases. All scores decline as you move from the lower spending schools to the higher spending schools. The schools from the spending ranges <$585 and $585-615 have almost identical scores, but once we move down to the schools with spending of $615-645, the decrease in the percentages of students passing drops significantly and even further once we get to the schools with the highest spending. The percentage passing math scores saw the most change with a drop from the high of 94% to 66%. A possible explanation for scores declining even though spending is increasing could be the size of the schools. So even though budgets might increase on a per student basis for these schools, the size of the schools and their class sizes might exert negative pressure on scores that outweigh the benefits of increased spending.


The summary of scores based on school size suggests that the large category should be stratified further to extract more useful information about that category. The scores of the small and medium schools are almost identical, where as the scores of the large schools show two things that differ from the small and medium schools. The first observation is that the average math and reading scores are lower in the large schools than the small and medium schools. However, the average scores' decline is dwarfed by the drop in passing rates for both math and reading, but especially the math score. The percentage passing math dropped from 94% to 69% - a 27% decrease - where as the percentage passing reading saw a 15% decrease. The large school category should be stratified into more subgroups - possibly 2000-3500 and 3500-5000 - to see if the original bin of 2000-5000 contained distinct sub groups.


One observation that was seen in both the spending bin and size bin scores was that even though there were relatively small changes to the average scores of the students the percentage passing could fall off greatly. This would suggest that those populations saw very high performing students' scores balancing out very low performing students' scores. So even though the average score of all the students was well within passing range, the failure rate could be as high as 30% in some cases. This suggests that the schools in these groups have a significant achievement gap between their highest performing students and their lowest performing students and should look to close this gap to ensure equitable educations for all of their students. 